Document formal script syntax (#5336)
nextflow-io/nextflow: docs/script.md

# Scripts

> Nextflow is a workflow language that runs on the Java virtual machine (JVM). Nextflow's syntax is very similar to [Groovy](https://groovy-lang.org/), a scripting language for the JVM, but Nextflow is specialized for writing computational pipelines in a declarative manner. See {ref}`syntax-page` for a full description of the Nextflow language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nextflow is a workflow language that runs on the Java virtual machine (JVM). Nextflow's syntax is very similar to [Groovy](https://groovy-lang.org/), a scripting language for the JVM. However, Nextflow is specialized for writing computational pipelines in a declarative manner. See {ref}`syntax-page` for a full description of the Nextflow language.
```

## Hello world

You can use the `println` function to print to the console:

```groovy
println 'Hello, World!'
```

## Variables

Variables are declared using the `def` keyword:

```groovy
def num = 1
println num

def date = new java.util.Date()
println date

def x = -3.1499392
println x

def flag = false
println flag

def str = "Hi"
println str
```

:::{warning}

> Variables can also be declared without `def` in many cases, but this practice is discouraged outside of simple code snippets because it can lead to a {ref}`race condition <cache-global-var-race-condition>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Variables can also be declared without `def` in many cases. This practice is discouraged outside of simple code snippets as it can lead to a {ref}`race condition <cache-global-var-race-condition>`.
```

println flavor  // beta
```

(script-closure)=

## Closures

A closure is a function that can be used like a regular value. Typically, closures are passed as arguments to *higher-order functions* to express computations in a declarative manner.

For example:

```groovy
def square = { v -> v * v }
```

The above example defines a closure, which takes one parameter named `v` and returns the "square" of `v` (`v * v`). The closure is assigned to the variable `square`.

`square` can now be called like a function:

```groovy
println square(9)
```

The above example prints `81`.

> The main use case for a closure, however, is as an argument to a higher-order function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main use case for a closure is as an argument to a higher-order function:
```

Sudha = Kumari
```

Closures can access variables outside of their scope:

```groovy
def counts = ["China": 1, "India": 2, "USA": 3]

def result = 0
counts.keySet().each { v ->
    result += counts[v]
}

println result
```

A closure can also declare local variables that exist only for the lifetime of each closure invocation:

```groovy
def result = 0
myMap.keySet().each { v ->
    def count = myMap[v]
    result += count
}
```

While the `each` method is a convenient way to iterate through a collection and build up some result, a more idiomatic way to do this is to use the `inject` method:

```groovy
def result = counts.values().inject { sum, v -> sum + v }
```

This way, the closure is fully "self-contained" because it doesn't access or mutate any variables outside of its scope.

## Script definitions

So far, we have been focusing on the basic building blocks of Nextflow code, like variables, lists, strings, and closures.

> In practice, however, Nextflow scripts are composed of *workflows*, *processes*, and *functions* (collectively known as *definitions*), and they can *include*  definitions from other scripts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In practice, however, Nextflow scripts are composed of *workflows*, *processes*, and *functions* (collectively known as *definitions*), and can *include*  definitions from other scripts.
```

To transition a code snippet into a proper workflow script, simply wrap it in a `workflow` block:

```groovy
workflow {
    println 'Hello!'
}
```

> This block is called the *entry workflow*. A script can only have one entry workflow, and it serves as the entrypoint when the script is executed. In fact, whenever a script contains only simple statements like `println 'Hello!'`, Nextflow simply treats it as an entry workflow!

Reviewer: Workflows page, the first few handful of lines.

> This block is called the *entry workflow*. A script can only have one entry workflow, and it serves as the entrypoint when the script is executed. In fact, whenever a script contains only simple statements like `println 'Hello!'`, Nextflow simply treats it as an entry workflow!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This block is called the *entry workflow*. A script can only have one entry workflow. It serves as the entrypoint when the script is executed. Whenever a script contains only simple statements like `println 'Hello!'`, Nextflow simply treats it as an entry workflow!
```
